Philip A. Fisher
Collected Works

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd i

07/05/12 7:27 PM

INTRODUCING WILEY INVESTMENT CLASSICS
There are certain books that have redefined the way we see the worlds
of finance and investing—books that deserve a place on every investor’s
shelf. Wiley Investment Classics will introduce you to these memorable
books, which are just as relevant and vital today as when they were first
published. Open a Wiley Investment Classic and rediscover the proven
strategies, market philosophies, and definitive techniques that continue
to stand the test of time.
Books in the series include:
Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s
Frederick Lewis Allen
Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market
Walter Bagehot
The Go-Go Years:The Drama and Crashing Finale of Wall Street’s Bullish
60s
John Brooks
Fifty Years in Wall Street
Henry Clews
Value Averaging: The Safe and Easy Strategy for Higher Investment
Returns
Michael E. Edleson
Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and Other Writings
Philip A. Fisher
Paths to Wealth Through Common Stocks
Philip A. Fisher
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds by Charles
Mackay and Confusion de Confusiónes by Joseph de la Vega
Martin S. Fridson, Ed.
Where the Money Grows and Anatomy of the Bubble
Garet Garrett
The Stock Market Barometer
William Peter Hamilton
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises
Charles P. Kindleberger and Robert Aliber

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd ii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Reminiscences of a Stock Operator
Edwin Lefèvre
The Battle for Investment Survival
Gerald M. Loeb
A Fool and His Money: The Odyssey of an Average Investor
John Rothchild
The Common Sense of Money and Investments
Merryle Stanley Rukeyser
Where are the Customers’Yachts? or A Good Hard Look at Wall Street
Fred Schwed, Jr.
The Alchemy of Finance
George Soros
The Aggressive Conservative Investor
Martin J. Whitman and Martin Shubik
Supermoney
Adam Smith

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd iii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Philip A. Fisher
Collected Works
Foreword by Ken Fisher
Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits,
Paths to Wealth through Common Stocks,
Conservative Investors Sleep Well, and
Developing an Investment Philosophy
Philip A. Fisher, Fisher & Co.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd iv

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Contents
Publisher’s Note
Foreword
Common Stocks And Uncommon Profits
Paths to Wealth through Common Stocks
Conservative Investors Sleep Well
Developing an Investment Philosophy

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd v

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Publisher’s Note

A

lthough Philip Fisher is regarded as one of the greatest investors of
all time, it’s probably safe to say he doesn’t receive the acclaim
of some of his contemporaries. We hope the publication of all of
Fisher’s major published works in one digital edition will help to
enhance his legacy and provide valuable and time-tested wisdom to
today’s investors.
History repeats itself, just not in exactly the same way. Fisher advocated buying a small number of outstanding companies with terrific
growth prospects. He was an early investor in Motorola and Texas
Instruments and held onto those investments for years—to the great
benefit of his clients.The question facing investors today is:What are the
new Motorolas and Texas Instruments? What are the great growth stocks
that will provide outsized returns for the next 10 or 20 years?
We hope the publication of Fisher’s collected works will help investors to answer those questions. The four publications included here
provide Fisher’s complete methodology for identifying great investments and, just as important, demonstrate how Fisher applied his methods in the face of economic uncertainty. His work and perspective are
as relevant today as they were when first written.

vi

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd vi

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Foreword
My Three Bits on My
Father and His Writings

T

his is, finally, the complete collection of all the public writings of
Philip A. Fisher in one place. As such, this has never existed before.
So, what else is there new to say? When the Wiley folks asked me
to write this 2012 foreword to my father’s collected writings it seemed
unnecessary. After all, I’ve written lots about him and his
writings: The 2002 introduction to Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits
basically gave you his biography, who he was, and what he was like.
Then came the 2003 preface to his “other writings” that added Developing an Investment Philosophy and portions of Conservative Investors Sleep
Well. And finally came my 2007 foreword to the re-introduction of
Paths to Wealth through Common Stocks. All are included herein and need
no alternation. I wrote everything I could think of.
So, again, what else is there to say? I wracked my brain after
re-reading both his works and writings about them—and pondering him.
Turns out there is a bit more—in three blocks: 1) a bit more about him,
2) a bit about Chapters 7–14 of Conservative Investors Sleep Well—which
are published here for the first time in 37 years, and 3) a bit of how I, as
the person who knew him best in the world business-wise, would envision how he might look at today’s world were he now in his prime.

A B IT M ORE A BOUT P HIL F ISHER
I remember it very well, like a lightning bolt hitting me. Just after he
had died a dastardly death from dementia, on March 11, 2004, I was
vii

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd vii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

viii

Foreword

sitting on my back deck on a warm spring afternoon.Yet I didn’t write
about my insight in my 2007 foreword—I guess because that was about
the book Paths to Wealth and wasn’t really about him. But what was my
insight?
Various far-flung family members had congregated at my home, as
commonly happens in any family when someone dies. Warm, clear
weather—beautiful views of the Pacific. Eating, drinking, chatting,
remembering; a few tears and lots of laughs. Normal phenomena for the
phenomena! My mother, ravaged by her own advanced dementia (she
didn’t pass on until 2010), was for the first time bedridden at her home
(where she and my father had lived and I had been raised), having just
suffered a fall and hip break—broken hips are unfortunately common
among the aged and that is what had also happened to my father in
1998, launching his long trajectory toward death.
My eldest niece, Caroline, named after my father’s sister (who was
herself named after the matriarch of father’s extended family, his aunt,
Caroline Fisher—covered in my 2002 introduction to Common Stocks
and Uncommon Profits), was there. I hadn’t seen Cary in a few years. She
was 36 then and a busy high-end pediatric psychiatrist based in Boston
who rarely got back to the west coast and hadn’t really wanted to see
my parents in their demented decline for fear it would blur earlier,
happy memories. I’d been bantering with various other family members
about father’s behavioral oddities and she blurted it out: “The only thing
you really have to know about grandpa is that he was a classic textbook
Asperger’s case.” My response was, “What’s Asperger’s?” And she profiled
it for me. And it sounded a lot like him.
Then I remembered. I’d heard that name “Asperger’s” before but
never much paid attention. And I remembered some doctor had written me after reading my 2002 introduction describing my father. The
doctor thought father’s behavior sounded like Asperger’s Syndrome.
But I had paid no attention. It was just some diagnosis from some guy
far away I didn’t know who didn’t know father directly—probably
some crackpot. But Cary was and is a serious psychiatrist and had
known him very well and I wasn’t going to discount her pronouncement. She was and is fully capable of diagnosis. That night I read at
length online about Asperger’s. I cried a lot that night and in some ways
knew my father for the very first time. It explained so much I otherwise
hadn’t been able to. It’s him to a tee. It was for me the missing link in
making him explicable.

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd viii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Foreword

ix

If you want to know who Phil Fisher was, first read about Asperger’s
Syndrome on Wikipedia. Then read my 2002 introduction to Common
Stocks and Uncommon Profits, and all his oddities tie together and make
perfect sense. If you come to understand this syndrome and my description of him you will know him pretty darned well.

A B IT A BOUT C HAPTERS 7–14 OF C ONSERVATIVE
I NVESTORS S LEEP W ELL
This reintroduces those February 1975 chapters of Conservative Investors
Sleep Well which were excluded in the 2003 version of Common Stocks
and Uncommon Profits and Other Writings. Why were they excluded then?
First, Wiley didn’t want the 290-page book another 117 pages longer.
Second, the excluded chapters were believed to be too focused on the
1970s and maybe redundant with parts of Common Stocks. I disagree. My
father was fundamental in investing in all ways and also almost never
wrote the same thing twice the same way. And I know that to be true
with these chapters because I helped him with them.
Take Chapter 7 on dividends. He had covered dividends before—in
fact, in Chapter 7 of Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. In both discussions of dividends, father—as always—thought in terms of total return
and regularly discounted dividends relative to total return, which is quite
technically correct. His main orientation was toward capital gains and the
lower stocks went the more important capital gains became. But, for a fact,
for years now, after every bear market, dividend-based investing becomes
overtly trendy and supported by the pseudo-intelligentsia. And so it is
now, in 2012. And here in Chapter 7 of Conservative Investors Sleep Well he
tells you—in the aftermath of another very big bear market, what was
then the biggest bear market since the Great Depression—why focusing
on dividends is, as he would say were he speaking and not writing,“Nuts!”
Chapters 8 and 9, while not earth-shattering, are a good recount of
the history of what caused investors to go wrong in the late 1960s and
early 1970s. Many of the problems he covers in Chapter 8 are still very
much with us today. This chapter is good reading for investors to see
how myopia continues, persistently, to engulf us.
I would rephrase his definition of conservative investing as simply,
“knowing your stuff.” If you know everything about what most folks
think of as a risky situation, then it isn’t really so risky. But you have to

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd ix

07/05/12 7:27 PM

x

Foreword

know your stuff. He always presumed most folks weren’t even close. He
regularly presumed it was easier to know what you needed to know to
invest successfully, given time and patience, than most could fathom.
And as he also wrote in his preface to Common Stocks, it is easier to know
what will happen than exactly when it will happen. So, in Chapter 10 of
Conservative Investors Sleep Well he gives you 15 fast pages on “Learning
the Facts.”
Chapter 11 asks (and answers) five questions that are just as valid today as
when he wrote it in 1975, and the answers are exactly the same as they would
be were he in his prime and contemplating all we now see around us. One
of the questions is in four distinct parts. As you read Chapter 11, ask yourself
what you think Warren Buffett would say in answering this question. Then
read my father. While the wording is very different, the thoughts are pretty
similar to Warren Buffett’s position. Computers were relatively new then but
becoming ever more ubiquitous. Did he think they were important then? No.
Would he think they are important now? No. He would think the stock is
the stock and your brain is your brain, and that’s pretty much what you need
to make a decision and that the computer is simply a tool and of marginal use
at best. I think that’s pretty much what Warren Buffett says today too.
Chapters 11–14 are truly contemporary right now in 2012, 37 years
after my father wrote them. What do people fret about now? What did
he write about then? A lot of the same stuff! Stocks versus inflation!
Stocks versus bonds, gold, and real estate! And stocks in a political swing
to the left! If you fear Barack Obama, read about stocks in the context
of a political swing to the left from someone who was a professional
through the FDR years. Then man up.
As these chapters came out in February, 1975—immediately after a
very big bear market, the biggest since 1937— he wasn’t cowed. In his
conclusion he is looking toward a long-term future with optimism for
the well-run company and optimism for technology. Think how right
he became eventually. But he always knew it was easier to know what
would happen than when it would happen—so he wasn’t trying to make
a specific short-term forecast. And that leads me to opine on what I
think he would think now were he in his prime.

A B IT A BOUT W HAT H E W OULD T HINK N OW
Imagine him today, were it possible, with all he had under his belt from
1907 on, but just now at his absolute prime, maybe the equal of a 45–50 year

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd x

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Foreword

xi

old. I can assure you that as a 61-year-old I know my brain isn’t as facile as it was when I was 45–50. That age, at least for me, encompassed
my optimum human capital combination of the benefits of education
and experience with the energy of adequate youth. What would he
think were he that age now with an extra dollop of experience someone that age couldn’t possibly have?
There are a few things I can be sure of. He would still think fundamentally and deeply. He would, as always, emphasize the long term
over the short term, thinking the short term too tricky to time. He
would recall, as he wrote in several passages herein, his view that in every
decade investors take on as gospel nonsense presumptions—optimistic
at times and pessimistic at others, but often for a decade at a crack—
that are classic herd psychology traps and totally disconnected from
fundamental, deep thought. He would try to think about what those
presumptions are now. He would be fixated on the pace at which technology breakthroughs keep piling up not fully morphed into products,
like larva-cocoons yet to be butterflies. He would expect great things
ahead and huge opportunities for those who could position themselves
to take advantage of them. He would be awed by the pace of DNA
sequencing and think about how it might impact the world 10–20 years
from now and want to root around for possibilities now.
He would study politics for fun, endlessly, but wouldn’t overly fear
the left or the right, either in America or the world. He would, as always,
be more conservative than liberal, but he would prefer a president who
is more competent regardless of whether liberal or conservative, and he
would find too little competency at all in either political side. He would
go by the old 1940s and ’50s line, not heard for a long time now: “I vote
the man, not the party.” That said, he was heavily ideological and heavily more conservative than liberal—but would still prefer a more competent liberal to a conservative he considered less competent—as he
thought most politicians were largely incompetent or they wouldn’t be
in politics. Hence he would, in 2012, prefer President Obama over any
of the four remaining Republican aspirants, as I write, because he would
see Obama as more competent than they despite seeing Obama as
ideologically deficient.
As to Mitt Romney, leading the run for the republican nomination
as I write, he would presume him less competent, and probably not
really all that good when he was in the private sector—instead mostly
lucky and likely mostly a skilled corporate politician at Bain. Why
would he so conclude? Because he would believe that were Romney

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd xi

07/05/12 7:27 PM

xii

Foreword

really capable as a CEO, a manager, a business leader, and developer of
leaders, that he would never have left the private sector to run for lesser
office. He believed in his bones that being a super CEO was simply the
cat’s meow. His view now would be that were Romney really any good,
he could have made a much bigger difference to the world as a gamechanging CEO in the private sector than as a senator or governor,
should have known that, and never strayed into his original runs for
office. Rick Santorum? Newt Gingrich? Ron Paul? He would see all of
them as unfit to manage anything he would think worthy of management and he would have weighted that over ideology. He would say,
“Where is the management competence?” He would have said the same
thing about Obama in 2008 but also about McCain then (and even
moreso). In 2012 he would hold his nose tightly and vote for Obama.
He thought his own way in the past and he would now.
He would look at emerging markets but he would look at them
exactly as he looked at Silicon Valley long, long before it was called that
when he was young in the 1930s.
Of firms with bigger market caps he would ask how deeply its roots
were embedded into the economy. He believed in big companies having
“big, deep roots” economically. He said that verbally a lot. I always
thought it ironic. He actually knew very little of tree or plant physiology. As somewhat of an avocational tree expert with a lot of training
and experience in this field, I always kept my mouth shut on this with
him because I didn’t want to deprive him of a fully functional analogy
even though it was inaccurate in it details. Most of the world’s biggest
tree species have shallow root systems devoid of taproots, including
California’s massive redwoods. But he would think, “How big and deep
are its roots?” The more turbulent the times, the more he thought that.
So he would have seen Facebook as a huge fad likely to be worth a
lot less a decade or so from now and not worth his time. He would ask,
“Where are the roots?” He saw a lot of things that were fads and not
worth his time. What he wanted in a big cap stock were big, deep roots.
Otherwise he feared it might topple. His view of Facebook would be
that they don’t have the potential for the “steady stream” of new products
he talks about in points two and three of his 15 points in Common Stocks
and Uncommon Profits. Hence, no roots, a toppler waiting to tip. When
others now talk about what’s happening here and now with Facebook
he would think they were silly. Not, “nuts,” one of his favorite words, but
silly and pointless. He would think there is no way to know where and

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd xii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

Foreword

xiii

when Facebook will peak, hence no point in worrying about it, but that
the long term for it likely is not so good. With a smaller cap stock he
would want to know if it could grow big, deep roots over time. He
wanted the roots to grow, essentially, as a percentage of the total. Bigger,
deeper roots made a big stock, with less explosive potential upside, still
more valuable, relatively, because it could endure and grow.
He would still like a stock like Texas Instruments or Intel, seeing 15
more years of Moore’s Law ahead and being sure the stocks would do
well. Deep roots! Strong on the 15 points. Able to take advantage of the
opportunities which remain to this very day—which remain of a magnitude unfathomable to almost all investors. And able, as he wrote in
Developing An Investment Philosophy about Raychem Corporation (now
long removed from public ownership and part of Tyco International),
to do difficult things others likely won’t try. He liked firms that could
and would do difficult but worthy things.
He would believe now in ownership of common stock as much as
ever, partly because he believed that stocks, when they are unfashionable,
will eventually be good investments, and they are always unfashionable
for years and years after big bear markets. But even more importantly he
would believe in common stocks because ownership of well managed
companies, in one way or another, is the only way to harness what he
always saw and would see now as the endless fruits of human ingenuity.
He would urge you toward stocks for the rest of your life thinking
long-term about how to harness those fruits. And here you have all his
writings to give you his thoughts on why and how to do that. So, these
have been my last three bits on my father and his writings.
Have fun. Do well. And I hope you benefit from his writings as so
many have over the decades and will continue to generation after generation. His wisdom is apparently timeless.
Ken Fisher
Kings Mountain, California
March, 2012

PQ482-0290G-FM.indd xiii

07/05/12 7:27 PM

PQ482-0290G-Part[0i-ii].qxd

4/5/12

10:12 AM

Page 1

COMMON STOCKS
AND UNCOMMON
PROFITS

PQ482-0290G-Part[0i-ii].qxd

4/5/12

10:12 AM

Page 2

Copyright © 1996, 2003 by Philip A. Fisher. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy free to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax
978-750-4470, or on the web at www. copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, e-mail:
permcoordinator@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty:While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974,
outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Fisher, Philip A.
Common stocks and uncommon profits and other writings / by Philip A. Fisher.
p. cm. — (Wiley investment classic)
Originally published: Common stocks and uncommon profits. Harper & Brothers,
1958.
Includes index.
ISBN 0-471-44550-9
1. Stocks. 2. Investments. I. Fisher, Philip A. Common stocks and uncommon
profits. II.Title. III. Series.
HG4661.F5 1996
332.83⬘223—dc20
95-51449
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 1

Introduction
Kenneth L. Fisher

This is among the most beloved investment books of all times, among
the bestselling of classic investment books, and now forty-five years old.
My father wrote his original preface at my childhood home in September
1957. It remains herein. Forty-five years later in October 2002, in my
current home, I dare write this, this book’s first new preface in all those
decades.
If you’ve read my revised preface, you might think my father is
deceased. No. As I write, he is ninety-five and alive. But he is reduced
by the awesome wreckage induced by late stages of aged senile dementia and probably by Alzheimer’s disease (there is no right way to be sure).
He is at home, in bed, about thirty feet away from where he wrote Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and his other writings.
He deteriorates steadily.To those few of us taking care of him, it is
startlingly quickly. By the time you read this, he may well be deceased.
He will never read these words—were they read to him, he couldn’t follow their meaning for more than a sentence or two before losing the
thread in dangling disconnects cut by his dread disease. He was a great
man but is now just a little, old man very late in life. But he is my little,
old man. What this disease routinely does to people is nothing to be
ashamed of; it is just a disease, not a failing.When I wrote my third book,
based on one hundred cameo biographies of dead pioneers of American
finance, I defined it as “dead” pioneers only on the premise that dead
people don’t sue, just in case I got anything wrong. But I also did so
because I purposefully didn’t want to cover my father in any regard. I
didn’t want to say anything that might hurt him if I interpreted him differently than he might have wished, which I well might have.
1

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

2

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 2

Introduction

Now I need not worry about that because he won’t know what I
say here. So it is time to tell you a bit about the man who wrote one of
the best beloved investment books of all time. I’m best qualified to do
so because I know him better than anyone if you combine business and
personal matters. Oh, certainly, in other ways my mother, his wife, knew
him far better than anyone. My aunt, his sister, knew him longer than
anyone. But their relationships were basically personal, not business.Yes,
I have an eldest brother who worked very closely with him briefly and
was temporarily my business partner and to whom I’m close. But
Arthur’s professional time span around Father was fairly short. He
evolved to academic humanities, where he is today. Father always loved
Arthur foremost of his three sons, and Arthur was more emotionally
linked to Father than I was. But Arthur would be first to tell you I spent
vastly more business time around Father over many more years and had
a day-to-day relationship with him when Arthur couldn’t, materially
because Arthur lived a thousand miles away.

BEGINNINGS
My paternal ancestors were Jewish, mainly from Prague, Czechoslovakia,
and Germany, all arriving in San Francisco in the early 1850’s. My father’s
paternal grandfather was Philip Isaac Fisher and was both Levi Strauss’s
original accountant and the person who opened and closed Strauss’s first
store for him on a daily basis and served Strauss his entire career. My
great-grandfather was not wealthy but at his death was financially comfortable. His wife died young, and his eldest daughter, Caroline or Cary,
donned an important role caring for her siblings. My grandfather,
Arthur Lawrence Fisher, the youngest of eight, adored Cary, who played
partial surrogate mother. Born in 1875 in San Francisco, Arthur
Lawrence Fisher grew, graduated from UC-Berkeley, and attended Johns
Hopkins Medical School, graduating in 1900 and returning to San
Francisco to practice medicine as a general practitioner. Later (perhaps
in World War I but maybe earlier, during post-doctoral scholarshipbased research at Rockefeller University), he developed a specialty in
orthopedics, becoming the third orthopedic surgeon west of the
Mississippi and a founding member of the Western Orthopedics Society.
In 1906, Philip Isaac Fisher died, stalling briefly Arthur Fisher’s marriage
to Eugenia Samuels. The marriage stalled again behind the infamous

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 3

Introduction

3

1906 fire and earthquake. Finally they married, and my father was born
the next year, on September 8, 1907. He was named originally Philip
Isaac Fisher, after his recently deceased grandfather.
Four years later in 1911, my father’s sister, his only sibling, was born.
She was named Caroline after Aunt Cary. Aunt Cary had married well,
to a Levi Strauss relative named Henry Sahlein, who was introduced to
Cary through her father.Aunt Cary played an important role in the lives
of Fishers for two generations, those of both my grandfather and father.
Aunt Cary not only secretly bankrolled my father’s education (something he never, ever knew), but also secretly gave my grandfather money
to buy a car for Father that became serendipitously seminal to his career
evolution. And Cary provided ongoing family social structure that
enriched Father’s fragile emotional existence as a child—a process that
continued for decades. If my parents had had a daughter, she would have
been named Cary, as was their first grandchild.
Unlike many doctors, my paternal grandfather was largely uninterested in money. He did a great deal of charity work and academic
medicine, but he didn’t care for business or money. When his private practice patients couldn’t pay, he simply cared for them anyway. When he
sent out bills that went unpaid, he ignored rebilling or collection
attempts. He was thought of by myriad people as saintly for his kind,
warm, and generous persona. Fortunately for his immediate family, he
had Aunt Cary to “secretly” bankroll him behind the scenes. Without
Cary, you likely would never have gotten this book.
Father was originally privately tutored. My grandfather didn’t
believe in the elementary schools of the day, and Aunt Cary could afford
better. Later, Father was enrolled in San Francisco’s prestigious Lowell
High School. He graduated at age sixteen. Smart, too young, well educated from tutoring, Father was also awkward and lacking in social skills
other children normally learn in elementary school. He was frail, brittle,
and uncoordinated sports-wise; and being young by comparison, he was
small relative to Lowell classmates. So he felt socially insecure, which was
furthered by his mother’s incessantly critical and negative nature. At
sixteen, Father started at UC-Berkeley; but later, with financial aide
from Aunt Cary and a car paid for by her, he transferred to smaller and
friendlier Stanford University.That transfer also proved fateful.
He dutifully returned to San Francisco on weekends, which began
with a ritual Friday night family dinner at Aunt Cary’s and Uncle
Henry’s.These dinners spanned almost fifty years, starting before Father’s

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 4

Introduction

birth, and included even distant family members.The dinners were central to building Father’s early social skills. (The ritual still existed briefly
when I was a child.) My grandparents always attended. Father arrived
directly from Berkeley or later Stanford. Cary’s house, which if it existed
today would be called a mansion, was built in the 1890’s by Uncle Henry
on Jackson Street, just off Van Ness. The multi-course feast involved
much discourse and after-dinner debate that often turned various family
participants combative, something my grandfather loved watching.There
were lots of child-aged females; but as the only male of his generation,
Father became a particular favorite of Uncle Henry, which made these
events particularly memorable to father—his one chance as a young man
to stand out in a crowd.After dinner, Father returned home with his parents, heading back to college Monday morning.
To Father, Stanford was spectacular.Warm, beautiful, laid-back, prestigious, he felt more comfortable at Stanford than at Cal or pretty much anywhere else. Upon graduating at twenty, and still insecure but feeling safe at
Stanford, he remained in the then brand-new first class of the Stanford
Graduate School of Business, again secretly underwritten by Aunt Cary.
Father never knew about Cary’s financial largesse on his behalf. Multiple
other family members knew. Cary and my grandfather believed it was better if the beneficiary of the largesse thought it came from a father who
earned his savings rather than from a rich aunt who married money.
Stanford didn’t then have an investment class as it does now; but
as Father has described in other writings, there was then a class that
traveled to visit and analyze local businesses. Father had a car and
volunteered to drive the professor, Boris Emmett; so they spent a lot of
time together, which had a profound effect on Father. He felt he learned
more from those car rides with Emmett than from all of his other time
at Stanford combined. He described all that better than I could in his
1980 Financial Analysts Research Foundation (FAF) monograph,
“Developing an Investment Philosophy,” and so I won’t tread there. In
his original preface to Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, he
described his early business years, so I won’t tread that turf either.

MIDDLE LIFE
As World War II evolved, Father put his business interests on ice and
enlisted.Too old and too well educated for ideal cannon fodder, he got

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 5

Introduction

5

lucky. Long-time mentor Ed Heller enlisted ahead of him and pulled
some strings—somehow Father was made an instant officer and hence
never saw the front line. Instead, he fought the war from behind desks
all over mid-America, doing accounting and finance for the Army Air
Corps. On day one, he was a lieutenant, which he found awkward. On
reporting for duty, in uniform, lower-ranking personnel would salute
him, yet he didn’t know how to respond. Senior personnel expected
respect and appropriate behavior, which he also didn’t know how to
deliver. It took time to adjust. He hated the military, thought of it as a
terrible time, despite admitting quite readily that he was treated well by
it. He hated the regimentation, the lack of freedom, and being ordered
about. When stationed in Little Rock, Arkansas, he met my mother,
Dorothy Whyte, who was also in service there. My mother came from
Camden, Arkansas, which is very close to where President Bill Clinton
was later raised. Father flipped head over heels for my mother instantly
and asked her to marry him only weeks into their relationship; she
immediately agreed. In 1944 my eldest brother, Arthur, was born—
mother having been sent ahead to San Francisco to be with my grandfather for his medical supervision prior to and after birth. She remained
there until Father’s discharge, whereupon he returned home and renewed
his business interests as described in his monograph. Donald was born in
1947 and I in 1950. In between the birth of Donald and me, a daughter
died in childbirth.
Shortly after I was born, they bought a house on the site where they
now live in San Mateo, California, twenty minutes south of San Francisco. But they came to hate the house while loving the acre on which the
house sat.They loved the views, the trees, and the landscape. Father ripped
the house down and built the house in which I was raised and where he
and my mother resided ever after.We rented a house a block away during
construction.When complete, the house was big, all white, clean, and austere. In my father’s house, everything must be neat to a fault. Possessions
in all forms were sparse and exactly in their places or they drove him nuts.
He loved the yard. Until very late in life, he spent almost a complete day
each weekend in the bottom of the yard, which was almost wild but with
spectacular oak trees and wildflowers. He would weed and tend to his
wild-like garden and worry about all the things he fretted about, whether
the stock market, politics, family matters, or whatever; and to him that
time was a marvel, curative for everything annoying him. It was only as
his dementia started, causing him to fall often, that he gave up the garden.

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

6

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 6

Introduction

The late 1950’s and the 1960’s were the high point of Father’s life,
in my view. In 1958, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits was published, making him an instant, national star. Locally, it made him sort of
the dean of the San Francisco investment community. I doubt anyone
had before received so much instant stature from an investment book.
Certainly, tied to its era, Benjamin Graham’s Security Analysis took much
longer to become prominent. Local names that held sway in 1960
included Dean Witter, who founded and headed that great and locallybased brokerage firm. But to Dean Witter, New York was the mecca.
And the public already fathomed that a broker was not a money manager.The then famous Gerald Loeb, also of San Francisco Jewish origin
and also a broker, may have been bigger nationally, but he had long gone
on to New York and lost the local link. Simply put, in San Francisco by
1960, there was no investment advisory name as noted as Father’s. Different than today, all Northern California investing activities were geographically centralized in a few blocks around Montgomery and Bush
Streets in San Francisco. In that realm Father held prestige of which he
could have only fantasized in his insecure childhood.
There was a provision then in California state law, which still exists,
allowing an advisor who maintained fewer than fifteen clients and did
not hold himself out to the public as an investment advisor both to
avoid Securities and Exchange Commission registration and to maintain contracts for compensation for a percent of profits that were otherwise made illegal in 1940, a point most investors don’t appreciate
today. Before then, scam artists would seek clients, tell half to do one
thing, tell the other half to do the reverse, charge 20 percent of the
profit on whatever happened, and pick up 10 percent of the spread no
matter what happened. Hence percentage-of-profit contracts were illegal
for all investment advisors for more than forty years unless the person
had fewer than fifteen clients and did not advertise as an investment
advisor.And it was in this way that Father structured his business on his
return from military service. With the fame from Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits, he could easily maintain as clients a few very wealthy
local families who paid him well and yet required no real organization
to support him. That allowed him to feel superior to others who
required a more public clientele and to remain a very private person,
which fit well with his social awkwardness and insecurity. Despite his
fame and notoriety, he always felt uncomfortable in the public spotlight
and avoided it.

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 7

Introduction

7

Flashback to 1945. Herbert Dougall was hired by Stanford and started
the Graduate School of Business’s first dedicated investment course. In
all of history, only three people ever taught that course. Dougall
taught it from 1946 to 1968, twenty-two years in all, except for a twoyear sabbatical in 1961 and 1962 when Father taught the course on a
part-time, temporary basis.Among Father’s students was Jack McDonald,
who was hired by Stanford in 1968 and who has taught the course ever
since. When Dougall was away, it was largely on my father’s reputation
deriving from Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and from his alumnus status that caused him to be picked. Father loved it. It revived his
youthful love affair with Stanford. Had Dougall not returned, I could
envision my father doing that course, part time, forever. But Dougall did
return, and Jack McDonald took over in 1968. By Jack’s testimony, it
was Father who got him interested in markets. Before that, Jack had
been a young Hewlett-Packard engineer who changed the course of his
life’s work at the junction when he met Father. Jack has since said that
Father’s major contribution, as seen through Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits, is to be the first person to link the models of sustainable growth
with the concept of competitive advantage.Today, that is a pretty standard
package, but not then. In some ways Jack sees Father more as a seminal
strategist than as a stock market innovator or operator.
Anyway, for the many students and business folks who hold Stanford in awe and respect its MBAs highly and who think those who took
its graduate investment course advantaged, note: For a very long time,
that course was taught either by the author of the book you hold in
your hand (for two years) or by his disciple, and by only one man before,
ever. What a testament to Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits—one
few readers appreciate or know. For a very long time, until after I came
to temporarily own the book’s rights and then, subsequently, got into a
dumb fight with Jack McDonald (which was my fault), Jack always used
Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits as a formal or informal Stanford
textbook for the course. Over the years—not every year, but for many
years—Father drove down to Stanford at Jack’s request to deliver an
annual lecture and answer questions in Jack’s class. In May 2000, after
many years of absence and with Father well into dementia, Jack asked
him to return and lecture. I was scared to death Father would embarrass
himself because I knew he wasn’t at all the man he used to be. But Father
rose to the occasion and had one of his best days in a long time, delivering a rousing lecture and answering all questions from all comers. The

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

8

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 8

Introduction

whole thing, including Jack’s warm introduction of Father, was reprinted
verbatim in volume XV, number 7, of the Outstanding Investor Digest.
As Father’s dementia overtook him, he slowly lost more of the
memories of past businesspeople he had known. For the most part, the
earlier he knew them, the longer he remembered them, and the most
recent acquaintances faded first from memory. For example, he remembered many people from the 1950’s, whereas he had forgotten pretty
much everyone he had known from the 1970’s. Dementia is like that. But
more emotional memories are embedded deeper in the mind; and Jack
McDonald, whom Father met in 1961, thirty-three years into a seventytwo-year career, was one of the very last business personas to fade from
his recollection, demonstrating how much McDonald meant to him.
As the 1960’s passed, Father became ever less interested in his public image and more interested in being quiet. He fancied himself a great
judge of businesspeople and largely was, but he knew that was a private
activity. He responded to few local requests for appearances but declined
ever more of them, and he wouldn’t travel to appear in public ever
again. In 1970, at sixty-three, he still didn’t have a gray hair on his head.
That same year, my oldest brother, Arthur, an ecclesiastical historian by
training and a very good one, went to work to join him.Two years later,
I joined. Father’s vision was that we would work for a few years and
then slowly take over his business.That could never happen. It took me
only about a year to realize why. Father was such a stickler for detail and
so focused and so socially awkward and insecure that he was absolutely
incapable of delegating in any way. So, Arthur and I could never really
evolve into any meaningful contributors. I was inherently high energy,
rebellious, and emotionally pretty brutal to people; and as soon as I realized Father could never delegate, I knew I had to distance myself from
him for both our sakes. Otherwise, there was no opportunity for me,
and either he would hurt me or I would hurt him or both. It took
Arthur four more years to leave, and initially he left to join me. But it is
tough for an older brother to join his younger brother as a junior partner,
and that wasn’t meant to be. So,Arthur left the industry and I remained,
but separate, interacting but distanced from Father.These years were the
first real disappointments since Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits
appeared. They included both the brutal 1973–1974 bear market and
the beginning of Father’s body starting to slow a bit. In 1977, he was
seventy; and while he would never admit it and while still exceptionally
energetic for a man that age, he wasn’t as buoyant as he had been and

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 9

Introduction

9

for the first time began to show the early signs of aging. His hair was
thinning and partially gray now. In the afternoon train rides down the
peninsula, he started falling asleep regularly. Sometimes in the afternoon, he fell asleep at his desk. He was due, but he couldn’t quit.
During these years, he determined that he would improve the quality
of his holdings by weeding out the weakest among the few he owned to
own even fewer of higher quality. In retrospect, and without him fathoming it, what he was doing was cutting down the universe requiring his
attention to match diminishing energy. Early in his career, he might have
owned thirty stocks: a few big established ones, some mid-sized ones he
had bought as smaller companies and still held and would for decades,
some small ones for which he had high and long hopes, and a handful of
private-placement, venture cap–type holdings in tiny amounts that he
thought of as icing rather than cake. In the mid-1970’s, he steadily and
slowly sold the ones he thought less of and concentrated on his favorite
holdings, so that by about 1990 he held six stocks and by 2000 he held
three. None of it went well. My advice to all investors is to stop making
investment decisions of any kind when you get old, whatever “old” means
to you. Stop before you get old. I’ve watched great investors age, and there
are no old, great investors. There are old men who were great; but the
process of investing is too vital to allow for old age and future greatness
together, and aging becomes more powerful than the prior greatness,
which eventually implodes foolishly. In medicine,“aged fragility” is a great
frontier as a future, new recognized, disease but now it stops all old great
investors. There simply are no great octogenarian investors. In his later
years, Father could talk well and think well, but he didn’t have the clarity
for great decisions and his sales were poorly timed, consistently. Late in life,
he would say things like he was looking for stocks he could hold for thirty
years, which sounded silly for an eighty-five-year-old. People often
thought it was charming, which was also pretty silly. I think a lot of other
people knew he was doing this because he loved it and couldn’t quit, even
if it wasn’t good for him financially. But he was indulged by everyone,
including me.What did I care? If it made him happy, it was fine by me. But
some could see that he was a bit like a man hanging around the ballpark
with bat and glove when too old to play. His few late-in-life purchases were
not successful. He would have been much better off financially if he had
just quit doing anything at the age of eighty or even seventy. It wouldn’t
have mattered if he sold and went into index funds or just held what he
owned until he died.As it was, his decisions detracted value steadily.

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

10

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 10

Introduction

His long-held prescription for investors had been to buy great companies and pretty much hold them forever. And he had owned great
companies. Had he followed his own prescription late in life and not
attempted to fiddle and fix past his prime, he could have held what he
owned until death and done far better than he did. I don’t recall everything he ever owned, but I recall the main holdings. In 1973, at the market’s
peak, he owned among then-big firms in big amounts Dow Chemical,
FMC Corporation, Motorola, and Texas Instruments. Among mediumsized companies in big amounts, he owned Raychem and Reynolds and
Reynolds.Those six stocks then constituted two-thirds of his net worth.
The biggest positions were Motorola,Texas Instruments, and Raychem;
and had he held them all until now, despite the ravaging of the
2000–2002 bear market, he would have done very well. But with the
exception of Motorola, they were all sold and the timing was terrible in
every case, something he wouldn’t have done if he was younger.Among
smaller firms, he owned many, all selected between 1968 and 1973—and
few did well for him after 1973.The most spectacular by far was a venture capital holding in Manufacturing Data Systems, which went public and then was acquired in the 1980’s and in which he made a hundred times his money.The earliest of them, Rogers Corporation, he still
owns. Motorola he still owns. Late in life, he tended to sell the ones that
were long beat up, and often just before they came back to life with
spectacular bounces. He did that particularly with FMC and Texas
Instruments in the 1980’s and Raychem in the 1990’s.
Also in the 1970’s something happened in his mind that I don’t
understand. His father had practiced medicine until very shortly before
he died in 1959. In just a few years, my grandfather got what today
would probably be diagnosed as Alzheimer’s or some form of dementia.
He quickly deteriorated, falling apart and then passing away. But Father’s
analysis was different. He thought his father fell apart because he
stopped working; and he concluded that if he stopped working, he, too,
would fall apart and die. And so he concluded he had to drive himself
on. For the rest of his life, work was life itself. Slowly, he resigned himself to being able to do less, but he pushed himself to do as much as he
could and did a remarkable job of it. He saw life as like a muscle—if you
worked it hard, it kept working for you; but if you let it relax, it would
weaken (and in his mind it would lead to decay and death). Even when,
eventually, his dementia forced him to quit working completely, he
resented it terribly and believed it would cause his death rather than

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 11

Introduction

11

seeing it the other way around—that his dementia was taking him down
whether he worked or not. Even after the dementia was diagnosed, he
kept working, with monthly visits to the neurologist to appraise the status of his condition. In 1999, with dementia impairing but not stopping
him, I moved his office into his home, into my old bedroom, including
everything that remained in his former office. He told his few remaining clients about his condition and they remained with him; but he
could hold back the failing-memory march for only about eighteen
months longer. In 2000, he gave up completely. For the next year, he
talked to me steadily, asking about writing another book, how to get
back into business, whether he could travel around to universities to
lecture like he did to Stanford. He even made a stab at writing another
book, which he envisioned as What I’ve Learned in the Past Twenty-Five
Years. But he only got seven pages actually dictated. The energy was
draining from him almost monthly, and his mental capability steadily
diminished. As the disease will do, he talked about plans one morning
and forgot them by afternoon.When his career was over after seventy-two
years, he initially became tremendously depressed because his self-image
was so linked to his career functioning. As my deceased mother-in-law
used to say,“Old age isn’t for sissies.”

WHAT KIND OF MAN?
Father was sparse, Spartan, serious with a weird sense of humor linked
to plays on words. He loved puns and referred to anyone else’s pun as,
“two-thirds of a pun, or PU!”When I was a child, my friends were all
scared to death of him because he had an unintentional cold stare that
pierced right through you. If you didn’t know him well, he scared you
to death—dark hair, dark complexion, not big (in fact, almost gaunt),
but scary looking, and often dressed in dark clothes. Had he been
twenty years younger and seventy-five years earlier, he would have
looked a bit like the archetypal image of the thin, dark-haired, darkdressed, bad-guy gunslinger in westerns.You could fantasize him saying,
“Just one move and I’ll plug you.” But he didn’t “plug” anyone. He
wasn’t mean. He just looked mean. He didn’t have to say a word. Still,
children tip-toed around him and scooted fast to avoid him. Again, he
wasn’t mean, but he wasn’t warm and fuzzy either; and he never, ever
praised anyone except my oldest brother, whom he adored from birth.

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

12

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 12

Introduction

Fact is, I’ve always known my father held me in high regard, maybe
higher regard than almost anyone he ever interacted with, even if he
displayed it in strange ways and often not at all. Often not at all. For
example, except once when I was sixteen that I recall very, very distinctly, he never, ever praised me directly about anything at all until
I was well into my forties. It bothered me when I was young, but I
came to accept it. That was who he was. He just wasn’t the praising
kind. He would tell others how proud he was of me, almost bragging,
and I’d hear it from them; but he could never tell me. He later told me
he regretted that but hadn’t known how to deal with it. This type of
communication was difficult for my father.
Let me help you put that in perspective by describing a part of his
career. Decades before a world of computer screening, he had a
methodology he employed for finding new ideas for new stocks. He let
it be known that any young investment man could set an appointment
to meet him just once and talk investments. Usually he would never see
the man again. But if he thought the person unusually capable, he would
see him repeatedly and offer to swap ideas over time. He let the other
guy know what he was interested in and vice versa; and then over time
if they saw something of interest, they would swap ideas. These folks
passed on many ideas to father over the decades.Yet he was so clear in
what he wanted, relative to the fifteen points, and so focused to do
nothing else, that in his entire career he essentially only followed any
one man into a stock once. Other ideas from that same person he
brushed off because they were never quite good enough in his mind—
not quite right.
He followed the thinking of two particular individuals twice. One
of the two had ideas that were money losers both times. The only
person he ever followed three times was me. He adopted three of my
stock ideas fully across his client base and for him and my mother and
made more than a thousand percent on each of them.That was the most
ideas he ever adopted from any one person, ever, and he did well with
all of them; mine all came in the mid-to-later-1970’s, late in his career,
which, as I’ve already told you, was a time when his successes were thinning and should have been, therefore, doubly precious.
But let me show you who he was. Of those three stock ideas, two
he never acknowledged to me.The third? More than fifteen years later,
in my forties, he sent me a short note to tell me I had done well with
it—he owned it still then and years later.When I recalled the other two

PQ482-0290G-INT[01-28].qxd

4/2/12

11:41 AM

Page 13

Introduction

13

ideas to him, he acknowledged them but no further. No congratulations.
No thank you. Because I was always less fearful of him than others were,
I verbally kicked at him a bit at times, which I did then, asking who else
had he ever gotten three successful investment ideas from. He pointed
out to me that there was no one, but that wasn’t so important.The key
was in him, he explained, in knowing which ideas to follow and which
to discard and that he hadn’t followed any of my bad ideas.That annoyed
me. So, I retorted that he had followed plenty of other people’s bad ideas,
and then he got mad at me and we didn’t speak for about a month.Then
he forgot he was ever mad at me, and the subject never came up again.
That was who he was: cool, cold, hard, tough, disciplined, non-social,
never quitting, ever confident externally but internally often scared.And
amazing. I know he respected me; but to the people he respected most,
he had the hardest time communicating that directly.
What was his daily grind like? In 1958, as Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits was published, Father arrived home from work in the
late afternoon, changed clothes, ate dinner with the family formally in
the dining room, and then retired to the living room, where he read,
sometimes business materials but usually library murder mysteries—
until bedtime. When I was a child, he would take a break at our bedtime to tell my brothers and me bedtime stories, which he lavished on
us—more on me than on my brothers because I liked them better.
Sometimes they were non-fiction history about heroic figures or events,
like Joan of Arc, the American Revolution, Paul Revere’s ride, the life
of Napoleon. Others were fiction of his own creation, something he
hoped eventually to turn into children’s books but never did.They were
all great. My brothers and I had separate bedrooms, and Father would
sit on the bed’s edge of whomever he was telling the story to. One or
more of us would lie on the floor nearby, and when we fell asleep, he
carried us to bed. He and mother went to bed about ten. In the morning,
he drove us kids to school at 7:30 in a beat-up old blue Oldsmobile and
drove on to a point a half mile from San Mateo’s train station. He walked
to the station and rode the rails into San Francisco. Early-morning San
Mateo retailers came to call him “the flash” because he walked so fast,
leaning forward in a world long before “power walking.” He believed
that if rain wasn’t hard, it did no good, and that if walking wasn’t fast, it
was a waste of mileage. He loved the railroad train and had been riding
trains since childhood. His morning train departed at 8:00. It arrived at
the San Francisco depot at Third and Townsend Streets at 8:30 (a block

